It is running.
We're talking to Dr. Sherwin Newland.
And I love the fact that this book begins in a library.
That's your first sentence.
I am writing about books and books that influence people and change people.
It's a wonderful library.
In your very first sentence and in the introduction, this book is being written in a library.
And this is kind of a book about books in a way, isn't it?
That's right.
It is really based on books.
Every one of the people I write about is
someone who's written a very important book.
And, of course, the thrust of this book that I'm working on now has a tentative title, Every Book It's Reader.
And when we were chatting on the telephone, you were mentioning that Leonardo, one of the paradoxical elements of his genius was that he said he was not influenced by books.
Is that true?
That's right.
He called himself...
An unlearned man, and he was called an unlearned man, using that term by everybody, because he had almost no Latin and he had less Greek.
And he used to say that one of the reasons that he was able to discover some of the things was that he was not prejudiced by Galenic anatomy, for example.
He had to learn everything on his own.
and it's one of the reasons that he was able to look up at rock formation and looking at fossils, reasoned evolution.
Essentially, he came right to the very edge of discovering, realizing evolution.
He didn't quite say it, but what he did say is that nature creates her forms based on her experience.
That devil is.
There it is.
Yeah.
But he didn't go any further than that.
Probably only a person of his extraordinary genius could get by without the, what, his fastest prologue.
Yeah, you know, I have decided after working on a few biographies that every once in a while somebody appears on Earth whose intellect is beyond the range.
of yours, mine, or even Johnny von Neumann.
Einstein may have been such a person, I don't know, maybe Newton was such a person, but Leonardo was certainly such a person, you know, that the rules don't apply to people like him.
They are not even the smartest people around.
They transcend parents, and I don't know what it is that combines to make it happen, but I'm
The more I learned about him, the more I'm convinced that his intellect was beyond the brightest intellects at almost any time.
And from what you know of him, did, well, of course he says he didn't, he did not expose himself to other teachings there?
No.
There were some things he read in Italian translation, but the translations were bad, and he didn't read an awful lot.
You know, he had books that he read.
It is amazing, yeah.
Because, you know, we try to figure out what Shakespeare's reading was.
For instance, even though we don't have his library, we can see the evidence in his plays.
And he certainly had to have... That's one of the reasons people often give significance for Shakespeare not being Shakespeare, you know, which is ridiculous.
He never had a college education.
How could anyone unlettered?
possibly be so brilliant.
And I say, look at Abraham Lincoln, you know, who never goes past the second grade.
The Wright brothers.
I went out to Dayton, Ohio a couple of weeks ago just to see the books that they, oh, I was really out there at Ohio State, but somebody invited me up to Dayton.
These guys were not formally educated.
One reason often given for their success is that they really weren't, you know,
what's the word I'm looking for, polluted by earlier, by conventional plot, you know?
And it's very interesting that on the 100th anniversary, somebody tried to replicate their, what they did and couldn't do it.
They couldn't get the plane to fly.
So there was really something, I think, about this genius that you just pursue on your own, and that maybe you don't need the prior writings.
But I think for most of us, we really do have to have these texts
Well, you know, now that we know this paradigm notion of the way science works, if you don't learn the paradigm for your time, and you're brilliant, and you apply yourself, you're going to make discoveries that are out of the paradigm.
And that's essentially what he did.
What a paradigm.
Yeah.
Well, the notion of the paradigm that we all learn
particular way of looking at our observations because we're trained to do that and then somebody comes along every generation or so and he just looks at it in a completely different way and that's how great scientific achievement occurs and this was true of leonardo he just never learned the paradigm he never learned the way 15th century people saw evidence and he was not
Well, he was not a religious person.
I don't know if you would call him an atheist or an agnostic, because he would never admit to anything.
The Church was, of course, so prevalent.
But he refused to explain things on a supernatural basis.
He didn't know what the supposed scientists were thinking.
So he invented his own ways of doing things.
It's wonderful.
And it's just astonishing.
He's almost aberrational, in a way.
Well, that's what I mean.
Once in a while.
Maybe it's once in three generations.
Someone's mind transcends anybody else's.
And with this person, all bets are off.
All bets are off.
And studies like what I'm doing are totally irrelevant, I guess, to the grandest scheme of things.
And it must also mean a particular kind of nurture.
Those two things have to come together.
I always think of Ted Williams, who was physically just right, had perfect reflexes.
and had the personality that all he cared about was hitting his balls.
And the eyes, too.
Well, the reflexes.
Everything was perfect.
So now and then, such a person will come along.
Ted Williams was my great living hero, I have to say.
If anyone had asked me who I would like to be other than myself, it always would have been Ted Williams.
Just wonderful.
Do you think, do you subscribe to the theory that if somebody, and particularly in the sciences, works of fiction are works of fiction, and the unique work of the imagination, but works of science, if William Harvey doesn't come along and do the circulation of blood, for instance, someone else is going to do that.
Yeah, I think always, always going to happen.
Something is bound to happen.
It's in the air.
We're ready for it.
a particularly capable person comes along and just takes the next step.
Of course, that's mostly true today, although every once in a while someone still does something really strange.
Like, I keep thinking of Barry Marshall.
and his realization that you didn't get ulcers because of stress, you got ulcer because you had helicobacter pylori in your stomach.
And, you know, for years and years people laughed at him, and he turned out to be right.
So now if you've got an ulcer, they put you on antibiotics.
But that's one example of one person who persisted and persisted and persisted, and that probably would not have been discovered for a very long time, another 25 years or so.
In the sciences, are there any books that are canonical?
I mean, obviously, the ones that you're writing about in this... Well, I can't talk about the sciences, because all I know really is medicine.
Oh, medicine.
There's no question that the Vesalius book, the Humanity Corporis Fabrica, is canonical.
There's no question that Harvey's De Mochi Cordes is canonical.
After that,
They're prominent folks.
You can't say that anything Hippocrates wrote is canonical because we don't know what Hippocrates wrote.
I suppose you can say what Galen wrote is canonical in the sense that it affected medicine.
from the second century right up until about the 17th was essentially the Bible.
But as you point out here, almost in a negative way.
It was in a negative way.
You know, it held, that was the paradigm that Leonardo never learned and that had to be broken shortly after Leonardo by the Salius.
To me, the really, the books that really changed things were, of course,
the many Hippocratic writings, even though it wasn't Hippocrates, Galen, the Vesalius, the Harvey, and the Morgane.
The Morgane had a profound effect on everybody.
That just changed the medicine dramatically.
I think those are the really big things.
And what I didn't realize until I, and I've handled the Vesalius, I think, was I had to handle Dr. Haskell Norman's, you know, which is really...
I'm sure you're the same way.
There is something you can't express when you handle a book like this.
And this, he suggested, was the presentation copy to the patron, you know, to the emperor.
Charles.
Charles, right.
But I don't think I realized, as you point out here, that this was the first true textbook.
When we have textbooks, really the whole concept of a textbook, a teaching book,
really, really begins with that particular body.
Yeah, it's a landmark in pedagogy, in addition to being a landmark in anatomy.
And in a way, it's a landmark in the history of art, too, because art was never the same after that time, after 1528, 1543.
Is illustration, in that particular instance, essential to the text?
Some people say, is the text really essential to the illustrations?
So it's the other way around.
Yeah, I think the illustrations are the core of that book.
And the truth is that you can get copies of the illustrations, but it's kind of hard to get copies of the text.
I've got a facsimile copy upstairs of the Vesalius that was done from a copy made with the original place, the Dutch.
Wow.
Just before World War II, the Dutch, I can't remember who the press was, got a hold of the original plates.
The plates survived, is what astonishes me.
Well, they only survived until they went back to Munich, and American ball was destroyed.
Yeah, but wow.
That's unbelievable.
I did not know that.
Normally, plates, as you know, plates very rarely survive.
You can't find a single Winslow Homer plate, for instance.
Really?
He's just in the 19th century.
There might be one.
especially if they're wood engravings, because they would just do them again, you know, scrape them down and use them again.
So you have a copy that's pulled from the original plate?
That's pretty good.
Yeah.
And not colored, I hope, as a company.
Are there books we talk about?
I found very interesting in reading about you and learning as much as I could that English is not your first language.
No, I'm speaking English.
But I got pretty good in English very fast.
Actually, by the time I started in kindergarten, I could almost say everything.
I had some problems, but I could do very well.
One interview I read with you
You credited the King James Bible.
Oh, yeah.
I wonder if you could talk a little bit about that.
Well, you know, I had been reading the Bible because I was brought up in an Orthodox household and spent a lot of time in synagogues, and we were reading a piece of the Bible every week.
But I'd read it in the translations that are there.
But then I went to college, and I decided I would take a course in the Bible.
I didn't know the New Testament at all.
So I took a year's course.
The first semester was...
what people like to call the Old Testament, and the second semester was the New.
And, of course, it was the King James Version, and the Bible was treated as literature in that course.
That's why we were taking it.
And it opened my eyes in ways that I had never imagined before.
It's the cadences.
It's the sound.
You know, biblical Hebrew, the Old Testament, only had
something like 5,000 words.
That's all they're worth.
French has 150,000 words.
And so the language is so spare, but the way they translated it, you can hear it ringing in your head when you read it.
And if you read it out loud, poetry, it's all poetry.
Well, people forget the Psalms really are poetry, because they were songs.
So you get that rhythm in your head, and it never leaves you.
And when I first started writing, including that, I realized after a while that the reason that I enjoyed reading my own writing was not
the language so much as it was the sound of it, and the sound of it really was from the King James Version.
Was it 90 or 95 percent of King James actually comes from Tyndale, the Tyndale Bible, which is some very interesting books.
That's pretty well understood, but I mean, obviously, that committee that did the King James Bible kind of
polished it up, but the first real great English translation, and he was hounded down, you know, and burned to death, and it's amazing.
So it was a book, it was a biography of Tim Dale published, I think, by either Yale or Oxford a couple of years ago, very, very fascinating book.
But it is interesting also that you're learning English, you're reading the Bible, obviously, through translation, but an English text
And your first language is Yiddish.
And so you, were you particularly religious growing up, or were you reading it?
Oh, yeah.
I was religious until I fell apart in my late thirties, and began to realize that my religion was obsessional neurosis.
It was nuts.
And that was the end of that.
There's a great line in here, and you quote a former colleague of yours, that one should never forget that the science, distinguishing between the science of medicine and the art of medicine.
I wonder if you could talk to me a little bit about what you mean by that.
Yeah, well, medicine, of course, is never going to be a science.
It's an art that uses science.
And one of the reasons that I think of it as an art
is not just because Hippocrates and the Greeks referred to it as the art, but because ultimately it is the expression of your scientific knowledge, the wisdom that you acquire by living on this earth, and by your reading and by your previous experiences, to the illness, I deliberately say illness and not disease, to the illness of one individual.
which by its very nature has to be distinctive to that individual so that nobody in history has ever had that illness.
Now, they may have the same disease, but not the same illness, because illness is the way disease influences the person who has it.
So if you take a disease, let's say cancer of the doll bladder,
The person who has cancer, the gallbladder, responds to it emotionally, responds to it physiologically, because everybody's physiological response to the pathology is different.
So that everybody who comes to you is going to be unique.
And you use all of your training, all of your knowledge, all of your life experiences to understand how that person
is living with this disease, so that when you decide on how you will approach the therapy for that disease, you may decide that the standard approach is just right.
You may decide that you have to modify it in some way.
You may decide, for example, that at this particular stage of the disease, no therapy is appropriate.
So what you're really doing is
you are taking everything and putting it into the crucible of your own mind, all of your impressions.
And you're also recognizing that it's an ongoing process, that just because you saw this fellow on a given date doesn't mean that his relation to the disease and your understanding of it remains static.
It keeps evolving all the time you're treating that person.
So with so many elements entering into it, my subjectivity,
my objectivity, his subjectivity, his objectivity.
How can you call it a science?
Science, by definition, is reproducible.
It should look the same to you as it does to me, and it never will.
One of the elements in treatment that has really never been studied is the doctor's psychological response to his patients.
I've been around a long time.
You've even called me sir.
So I've been around a long time.
And I'm absolutely convinced that even when a surgeon goes into an operating room, the decisions that he makes while he's operating, because we're constantly making decisions as you're working, are influenced by certain needs that he has.
And they're even influenced by transient events.
I write about that in one of the books, I think it's The Mysteries Within, that you may have met a colleague in the corridor or in the scrub room, and he may have said something to you that influences your mood about this disease on that day, and you may do something different.
You may look up and realize your assistant is not the assistant you want,
and he's someone not quite as skilled as you would want.
That will influence your decision.
You want to be more conservative, you think, or to be more aggressive?
You want to be more conservative?
Yeah.
Especially in teaching hospitals now, where the assistant is doing a lot of the technical work, it may be that way.
You may be influenced by an attack of
excess gastric acidity, as the commercials call it, that you had the night before.
There are so many things that influence how you feel.
And I'm even convinced, based on my own experience and what I've seen in many, many mortality and morbidity conferences, you're influenced by how you feel about that guy.
We don't love them all.
Some we don't like.
And I've got a feeling that unconsciously some of us make decisions
or maybe we're not quite as meticulous as some people.
That's quite an admission.
I'm very candid.
Oh, I'm sure of it.
As I say, I've written a bit.
I think it applies in every walk of every profession.
I know, interviewing hundreds of people over the years, people like yourself who I like and admire, you're going to respond differently.
Even when it comes to the interview, when it comes to writing the text that you write,
I mean, it's got to have, these factors have to have some influence in the product.
And you're saying that it also applies in the operating room.
As something as apparently distanced as that, even your relationship with the anesthesiologist assigned to you that day influences decisions, small decisions that you're making during the course of the procedure.
Yeah.
And that's never been studied, and it's never really been talked about at all.
And it's the human element that is, you know, we're all people, subjects of human emotions, and you're not a machine up there doing this.
Very, very interesting.
Are you familiar with the work that Robert Coles has done at Harvard?
A little bit.
But he does really try to, especially with training young medical students,
To make them, he believes that, and you say the same thing, you become a better physician when you become a better listener.
And part of what he wants to do with the storytelling and teaching literature in the classroom is that narrative makes an appreciation for narrative and storytelling makes for a better physician.
Is this something that...
Have you given any thought to the power of... Yeah, well, of course, there are two aspects to that.
One is that the taking and recording of history is a lost art.
It's interesting to me that the emphasis on narrative is relatively new, maybe the last ten years.
And it comes up just at the time that medicine has become so technological
that these kids feel, students, residents, people in training, young doctors, that they can find out everything they know by ordering the right test.
I used to say that in my day, Dr. Cole's day, of course he's a psychiatrist, but clinical physicians, we considered ourselves masters of history taking and of the physical exam.
Today, kids are masters of the menu.
They see a patient, he has a complaint,
An algorithm goes through this, this, this, this, and depending on what that shows me, I go to this, this, this, and I'm going to get a completely objectified diagnosis.
So the art of history taking has lost its value to these people, young people, and they don't realize how important it is.
So there's that aspect, which is the taking of the narrative, allowing the patient, guiding the patient,
so that a real narrative emerges.
And listening?
Well, yeah, listening.
And then there's the other aspect of it, which is recording as a narrative, instead of just short bursts, because you've got ten lines on the chart to fill out.
I used to say, and I still do, that it's a little bit like producing a play.
When you have finished taking a history and recording it, the person reading that history ought to be able to visualize in his mind everything about that patient, including his origins, the origins of his symptoms, including the image of him first doubling up with pain, or the image of him just sort of becoming aware of something not right.
You know, Dickens, Dickens' only advice to writers was, make them see it.
And that's why I think narrative is so important, that you should be able, by the time you've recorded that history, to make them see it.
Somebody comes in with pain.
And it's very important to know, did the pain start slowly, rapidly, suddenly?
or with immediacy.
Some diseases are characterized as if you're shot, you know, you have an ulcer, you're fine, just sitting there reading a book, there's that, which is very different than sitting there in over a five-minute period realizing that there's terrible pain, which is very different than over the course of days and days, gradually becoming aware of something, and then, you know, there it is.
And just that sort of narrative
can lead you to the diagnosis.
Because what you do is you replay in your mind what could have been causing that, and you begin to see it.
First you see it grossly, and then gradually you're seeing it microscopically.
The most important difference between Western medicine, scientific medicine, and any other form of healing that has ever existed
can be expressed with that one word, to see.
We demand to know exactly what's happening so that in our mind's eye we can visualize it.
If you take Ayurvedic medicine, Chinese medicine, tribal South American, various tribes, they have these various concepts.
Vague things go wrong.
There are imbalances.
The whole body is sick.
It's not good enough for us.
If I see a kid with right lower quadrant of pain, any Western physician should do this.
I should be able to visualize what his appendix looks like at the time that he comes to see me.
That used to be the great game predicting, not whether the kid had appendicitis or not, because we were almost always right, but what that appendix was going to look like.
The degree of inflammation, how advanced the disease process had come,
and even the anatomical position of the appendix in relation to the intestine.
So you always want to see.
And now that we're working on the molecular level, we want to see.
We want to be able to draw pictures of how those molecules are interacting and how various ions are going through channels in the membrane, this sort of thing.
You wrote a small little piece for the National Book Foundation on the book, the first book that moved you on.
It was a children's book.
I'll show you.
And you still have it.
Oh, I don't have that book.
I have my first non-fiction essay downstairs.
Yeah, I have the game.
But tell me a little bit about your reading, if you might, and how that helped shape your life.
Well, you know, you take a kid.
It comes from a home where other language is spoken.
And early on, can I give you a copy of an essay to take with you that I wrote about this?
Yes.
You can quote it, in fact.
Well, I'll give it to you.
I just wrote it about three weeks ago.
We're putting together, Glenn is putting together
the essays I've been writing over the last 10 years.
He's got a couple of books worth of it.
And I had given a talk when I won the National Book Award.
All three winners came to the New York Public Library.
We gave a talk.
And I gave a talk about exactly this.
My love for the language.
And I never wrote it.
And he said to me, you know, we've got to have that in the book.
Where's the essay?
I never wrote it.
So he said, well, damn it, write it.
He said, you should write it.
So I wrote it, and I just did it, too.
Because I had given the talk from little pieces.
Did they tape it?
They should have.
I don't know.
You probably could have gotten the tape.
It makes no difference, but I've got this guy.
You know, I embellished it because I added things that in a 15-minute talk you can't get.
But it essentially tells about a kid who quickly realizes that the key to America is the life.
They're wearing this little apartment in the Bronx, you know, four little apartments, seven people living in these four little rooms.
And out there is this whole amazing world.
You know, in Lost in America, I talk about taking long walks with my parents in the evening.
There's this great world.
How do you get into this world?
And then you go to school, and these astonishing,
You must have had teachers like that.
They're all Irish Catholic spinsters.
And this was their country.
And they, without saying it in so many words, were transmitting to us, damn it, it's going to be your country, too!
You know, you can't just go back to your immigrant assholes and keep speaking Yiddish or Italian or Greek.
We had a couple of Greek kids.
Aristides Gazetis was the one I remember so well.
Oh, yeah, one of my closest friends, Tommy Tappas, or as he was known among his Greek friends, Demacio Papawana, you know, or Czech or whatever, German, whatever they were speaking, you can't, you know, you can go home and do that.
But when you're in this world of ours, you've got to do it by our rules.
You've got to do this poetry.
You've got to read these books we tell you about.
You've got to get a library card."
And they opened this up to us and said, you know, it's ours.
It's got to be yours.
And I owe them everything I ever became, because I became an omnivorous reader.
Fiction as well as non-fiction?
At that age?
At that age, every time.
Today you're basically a non-fiction reader, right?
I'm basically a non-fiction reader, but, you know, I did a project about three years ago.
You don't mind if I take my glasses?
No, no, no.
Because I'm as vain as anybody.
More so.
Harold Bloom writes this great book, How to Read It.
In the book, somewhere it says, I don't believe this, but this is what he says in the book.
He says, every year,
Until a few years ago, I used to read Pickwick papers.
So he's got to read Pickwick papers 30, 40 times.
And I thought to myself, if Harold Bloom can read Pickwick papers every year for 30 or 40 years, I can read it once.
You know, actually we had it in the paperback in the house, Sarah had a copy, and I read it.
And by the second chapter, I was hooked.
So I just read one Dickens after the other.
You know, I read about ten of them, or maybe a dozen of them.
And then I decided I'll have a little moratorium for six months.
But it was two years ago, so I... But this was on the strength of Harold Bloom.
Yeah, Harold Bloom.
Because I got married.
And you know, like you, I do a lot of traveling, and...
They're all in paperback.
Take them with me.
I read them everywhere I go.
So, you know, I've done that.
The recent NEA report, if you've seen that, how they said the profound decline in reading among Americans, but they say literary reading.
So, therefore, people who read nonfiction books like yours or like mine or David McCullers or whatever,
don't count.
That's right.
Which I think is ridiculous.
Of course.
If I may say so.
So my wife, who reads nothing but nonfiction, but reads, you know, as many books as I do, and reads biographies and even flags them for me and points out things that I really ought to be alert to, she doesn't count, but someone who reads, say, exclusively Harlequin Romances or Daniel Steele, that person does count.
So I say there's a flaw in that...
Especially now, because every book that gets reviewed at the times is a political book.
Yeah, which is unfortunate, I think.
Oh, it's terrible.
Because these are just ephemeral little things anyway.
But I am pleased to see that they'll be doing more nonfiction.
I really don't want to take up too much of your time.
I know you've got it wherever you want to go.
I really did want to talk about the things that we've touched on.
I've got your books, and if it seems like I'm not asking a lot of obvious questions, it's because there has been a lot written on you, which I have access to, and there's no need to go over material, and that you and I have had two previous interviews, by the way, over the years, and I have those transcripts to draw from, so that I don't really know.
Yeah, we did one in person and one on the telephone, believe me.
Oh, yeah.
The one in person we did in Boston, actually.
Yeah, we did it for the How We Die book and the one that followed How We Live, I guess.
That's another title that you changed it.
What would you say was the driving motivation?
in you to influence you to become a writer about your craft.
It's not a craft, your art, your profession, however you wish to describe it.
Well, it sort of happened.
I would like to say something really lofty at this moment, but I can't.
I fell into this by pure good luck.
What actually happened was that
being interested in medical history, of course, and reading so much medical history, I was contacted by the fellow who started the Classics of Medicine Library, Les Adams.
He had been, Les Adams had been using our books at the Medical Historical Library to make facsimile copies of these classics.
He always had questions, and after a while, they started referring his questions to me.
And he asked me if I would join the board of the Classics of Medicine Library.
And then he asked me to write a few essays to go with the books that he was selling.
And they were long essays.
They were 25-page essays.
And I did that.
And then he started a Classics of Surgery library and asked if I would write an essay for every book.
And, you know, I was in the middle of a busy practice.
And I said that I would like to do it.
So I did it.
And I had a bunch of them.
Well, I wrote, if I'm saying too much, it's always better to have more.
Yeah.
I wrote an essay on Ignaz Semmelweis, the hand-washing guy.
in 1977 for the Journal of History of Medicine and Allied Sciences.
And it presented a theory of why he did the things he did that was quite different than what historians have been saying.
And it created a bit of a sensation in the community of historians.
So I was asked to give a talk at Columbia about it.
And in the audience was a fellow from the Princeton University Press.
And he contacted me and said, you've got to write a book for us about Semmelweis.
Well, I'm in the middle of this busy surgical practice.
I would have to take a lot of time to write this book.
And I thought to myself that if I'm going to write a book on Semmelweis, I want to write it for a trade press, because clearly they're going to give me an advance, and I can do this.
Sarah, who is an actor, had a close friend named Maria Tucci, who was also an actor, a very successful New York stage actor, actually.
And Maria was married to Bob Gottlieb, who was the president of Knopf.
And I had met Bob.
You know, we sort of schmoozed around together.
So I called him and I said, Bob, they want me to write this book.
I really want to write it for you.
And he said, how do I know you can write a book?
How do I know you can sustain a book?
I said, you don't.
He said, well, write me a few chapters.
Well, you know, and I know, if you write chapters, you've got to start doing an awful lot of research.
You've got to organize it.
I didn't want to do it.
And I didn't do it.
This was about 78.
Well, but there I am writing all these essays for Les Adams.
And finally, in 86,
I sent him a whole bunch of essays, and one of them was the Summer Wars essay, and I said, how about this?
Is this going to be a book?
Well, he called me up and he said, oh my God, yes.
And it was Doctors.
Isn't that crazy?
So we published Doctors, and halfway through it, he was my editor.
He left to become the editor of the New Yorker, so they saw him.
You should have been mentioned here, he's just left.
He had just left.
Yeah, he had just left.
I had another very good editor.
The book was published.
In those days, the Book of the Month Club had a selection and an alternate selection.
That's all I had.
And they chose it as the alternate selection for that month.
And it got these amazing reviews that soon started selling.
So I started feeling like I was a writer.
Well, this was 88.
In 89, Gottlieb asked me to write an article on Hard Train Plantation for the New Yorker, which I did.
Well, I didn't know that The New Yorker is read by everybody in publishing.
So one day the phone rings.
It was 92.
And some guy on the other end says, you don't know me.
My name is Glenn Hartley, and I'm an agent in New York, and I've got a great idea for a book.
And I never told you this story.
Yes, you have.
I love hearing it again.
Yeah.
And the book, I've even got a title that's called How We Die.
I'm smiling because that's Glenn.
That's Glenn.
That's what he does, yeah.
So I had talked to several editors in New York looking for someone to write this book, and your name keeps coming up, so would you be willing to do it?
At first I said I wasn't.
I had actually been interested in writing, and John Irving, who I had worked with on his
had recommended his agent, Peter something.
Anyway, I said, you know, I have an agent.
I just don't want to do this.
But I went home and I thought about it.
He had given me his phone number, so I called him and I met him.
And I really liked him.
He was about the age, he and his wife were both about the age of my older kids.
And they had the same aggressive intellect, so sure of themselves.
And a big moment for me, we all had lunch together, when I said to Lynn, to them both, I said, why should I leave Peter, what's his name?
Sterling Lord Literistic was the doctor.
And she looked at me as if I was stupid.
Because we're good.
We're smart.
We're good.
And I thought my daughter would say that.
This is what my daughter would say.
And that was when they got me.
So I, so...
I sat down and wrote the book, and I think the book was very different from what Glenn had anticipated, but it was a brilliant book.
And, you know, from there on in there it was.
It really touched a nerve, didn't it?
Just the right time.
And had you thought about doing something like that, or they totally proposed it, but then you kind of get into it.
And then tell me about, because I don't think we touched on this, because, all right, so they gave you this idea.
Yeah, and title.
And title, but then when you get into it,
It took on a life of its own, didn't it?
Oh, yeah, because what happened was that night after we spoke on the phone, I drove home.
Sarah and I talked about it, and I realized, oh, this guy is giving me the opportunity of a lifetime.
Because here I can summarize things I've been thinking about for 30 years, put it all together.
I can essentially create the capstone of my career.
But there was a particular way that I wanted to do it.
I wanted to do it without a plan, without an outline.
I just wanted to sit down with a pencil, and whatever came was going to come.
And we wrote.
I wrote a proposal, and Glenn read it.
He said, well, it's fine, but you need a patient.
So I thought about the first patient I had who died, you know, this guy who had his heart attack.
I walked in the room and he died, so I wrote that story.
And Glenn sent it out to 20 houses, and he called me at the end of the week, and he said, seven people want to buy this book.
Buy this book!
And he said, what's amazing is this was the week of Yom Kippur, and they're all away.
But yet, everybody wants it.
I said, what do we do now?
I said, well, we interview them.
We meet with them.
And we hadn't heard from Knopf.
So we went around, you know, Simon & Schuster, and Scribner's, and Random House, and I don't know who else, who knows.
And Knopf has already published your first book, this book here.
They had made no offer on it.
They weren't interested at all.
They didn't say anything.
So Glenn said, OK, we'll have an auction.
And then Knopf said, wait, wait a minute, wait a minute.
And they made me an offer, which was more than two and a half times what Glenn was making as the floor.
They love stories like that.
Yeah.
And, you know, the rest, bingo.
So I just sat down.
It took me exactly a year, January 2nd, 1992 to January 2nd, 1993.
And then how about the response?
Did you ever expect anything like that?
You know, runaway bestseller, National Book Award winner.
Crazy.
So what, what?
Runner up for the Pulitzer, it was the second.
And the only reason it didn't win the Pulitzer, some book about birds' beaks that hadn't even been reviewed won the Pulitzer.
And I got a letter from Rupp.
Can I tick you off just a little bit?
Well, you know what happened?
I got a call, a spontaneous call from a member of the committee.
He said to me, the way this committee works, we choose three titles, and we're not supposed to tell them who we think of the three should win.
We give it to the Columbia Committee.
There was no question that we thought should have won.
What they did with it, we can't figure out.
They chose this book about Bird Speaks.
It's a beautifully written book.
It's a really good book.
A little thing, though.
Yeah, and that was that.
It kills me when these little expanded essays become... Wow.
And the book, it was second for the Book Critics Circle Award, too.
Fabulous book.
I wrote it for it, as I recall.
Translated into 20 languages.
Do you have a sense of why it resonated so powerfully with so many readers?
No one had, Glenn told me, and I went to the library, medical library, and regular library was writing, that no one had ever written a book for ordinary people, so they would know what happens in cancer, all moments, whatever.
Even in medical textbooks at that time, there was no description of how death occurs and why it occurs.
So essentially, it was like a textbook for ordinary readers.
And because no one had written it, it just sort of burst on the scene.
And of course, you've got those great reviews right from the beginning.
Well, it is a textbook for ordinary readers, but it's read in just about every medical school.
I mean, it's every syllabus that I've searched now, you know, which has to be very satisfying for you, too, I would think.
It's my life's experience.
It's your life's experience.
Now, if we can just circle back, does your reading in the literature, all that has gone before, that figure in your
I mean, I guess everything that we, not directly, but certainly what you've learned and what you've written.
You've written this fabulous book on the monuments of medicine, certainly the literary monuments of medicine.
Did any of this, you think, help you in the writing of that book?
Well, you know, you're a writer.
You know whatever you plan, everything goes in.
Everything comes out of your unconscious mind.
It's all there, and it comes out.
And if you deliberately
If you don't plan, as I do, just sit and you write, it's all life's experience.
It's just coming in.
And if you're influenced by the cadences and the rhythms of the King James Version of the Bible, it comes out in a particular way.
I know it sounds awfully egotistical, but I love to read my own writing, and I read it out loud.
I read everything I write aloud to my wife.
I'm my fierce critic.
There it is.
I hate to say it, I hate to use the word fierce with my wife, but most demanding my life.
But there has to be, it's so interesting to me that you
hearken to the King James Bible.
I hearken to my Shakespeare.
I took it a year.
I was an English major, and I say when I took that two-semester Shakespeare course, my life changed in a way.
And it's the same language.
I mean, the iambic pentameter.
To learn how to read iambic pentameter, there are rhythms there, and there are nuances, which I totally believe affect the way I
Like I say, the way I do write, but I write to have sentences that I read aloud that stand up when they read aloud.
You know, I'm sure you get a lot of questions from people about the technique of writing, and you do it.
Every writer must.
And I only, you know, I wouldn't have had a teacher course.
but the one thing I do know is what I tell everybody.
Read it out loud.
Yeah.
You've got to do that.
I was at NYU at the medical school about a year ago.
Give me a talk.
I forget what it was, but they asked me to meet with this group of residents who were taking a course in writing about medicine, and their instructor was there, and she asked me to
analyzed in a literary way the first chapter of How He Died, the story of this man.
And I said, I can't.
So she did it.
And I said, dear, I couldn't believe it.
She analyzed all sorts of things about what I had done.
All I did was tell the damn story.
The way it happened,
But apparently it's the way you're supposed to write a story.
So what I'm saying is, you know from your own experience, it's in you or it's not in you.
I was just telling my wife this morning, I'm just finishing up a chapter that's centered around Elaine Bagels from Princeton, and reading these texts in their original Gnostic Gospels and 3rd century texts in their original language.
And it's pretty straightforward.
It was a wonderful interview, and I just mean to be profiling her.
And I said, well, before I get into this, I have to talk a little bit about the Old Testament.
I have to talk a little bit about the New Testament.
I have to talk about the Koran.
The word Koran actually means read and recite.
The first words said to Muhammad were read, and he was illiterate.
Read.
It was said to him three times, and then it was recite.
And that's what Koran means, read and recite.
I said, this thing has taken on a life of its own.
I mean, it's going in directions, this chapter, which is now up to 4,000 words, and I still haven't gotten into pagels yet, you know.
But it's all stuff I wanted to get in.
I wanted to get in the Book of Mormon.
I wanted to get in Mary Baker, Eddie.
These are all, every religion is based on a book.
I mean, the reading of a text.
Is it divinely inspired?
You know, Joseph Smith finds us purportedly buried in a hole, these gold plates.
And you look at the influence that it has.
Oh, anyway, I think I'm kind of agreeing with you.
You don't really know where the thing is going, but you feel, let's develop this angle here.
This feels great, you know?
That's the charm of a gentle madness.
It rambles.
That's the great thing about it.
The other great thing about it, of course, as you tell these stories, how people acquire the passion.
Oh, yeah.
It is fun.
Because they're all narrative.
Everything is storytelling.
Yeah.
I've taken up a lot of your time, and I think I've got plenty here, and if I have to contact you, I know you're going out here for a right book or something.
Let me, I want to give you that essay.
Come with me upstairs.
Let me shut this off.
The first half of the book, you're saying something about it?
Yeah, the first half of the book, of this volume, is the
the original.
And so it's all facsimile from the Yale copy.
There are only sixteen copies in the world left.
And the second half is the translation.
And one of these chapters, chapter fourteen, which is only, I think, two paragraphs long.
Well, one short paragraph and one long one is the essence of all of it, which is in this one paragraph.
That's the chapter?
Fourteen.
Do you want it in the Latin?
That's the translation I just showed?
This is the translation.
Yeah, that's fine.
Oh, I want to show you that desalius.
You wrote prefaces for how many of these?
I wrote prefaces for about fifteen.
That's a lot, though.
Actually, the first book I ever wrote
was this thing, which I wrote for the Classics of Medicine Library.
It's a book about the history of anesthesia.
And what it is, it's my comments and the original papers.
It's no real book.
Excellent.
And you were going to get me a copy of an essay, I think.
Yes, I will.
But first, I want to keep your wife and daughter that I do want to share with you.
Again, this is a facsimile of the book made from the original plates just before the war.
It's astonishing to me that those plates survived and then lost.
Yeah, horrible.
That's fabulous.
Thankfully, they didn't color anything.
I'm not a collector, but I have a couple of things.
Ambrose Perret, who I wrote about in the book, in 1634, it was translated into English for the first time.
And I'm sure you've had this experience.
I came in the office one day.
It was a brown paper bag, and I opened it up, and this was in the bag from the widow of one of them.
Oh, excellent.
It's the Par.
The first Par translation, 1634.
You do have a great book.
Yeah.
And this is an old prescription that was in here.
Somewhere in this book is the name, a little piece of paper with the name of every person who's ever owned this book.
Are there any notable ones?
No, no, they're just doctors.
American doctors.
Are there annotations?
Some of them are, you know, they were English originally and they become, well, someone has written a piece of something from Chaucer, a quotation from Chaucer in here.
Is there an applicability to this, do you think?
I read it such a long time ago, I can't tell you.
Oh, it's about the doctor.
It's just his description, you know, the doctor physically took.
He makes fun of that doctor.
It's interesting that one of the owners chose to... I have a goat.
Do you really?
I take alloperno, but if I don't take it, it's horrible.
It's an awful thing, isn't it?
It is.
So this has just been passed down from one person to the other.
That's the beauty of a book.
And I got the Morgane the same way, in a paper bag, all three volumes.
I had them on a three bag.
But this is the first English translation of the Morgane, and this is just in great shape.
I love all these little places.
I love these shelves with it.
My wife's adventure.
Yeah, when the tables come.
I've never seen that before.
That's wonderful.
Yeah, when we put these bookshelves in, she said, why don't we do that?
I've never seen that.
That's pretty fabulous.
If you don't mind, it's a...